"1. “To one who has faith, no explanation is necessary. To one without faith, no explanation is possible.”
2. “Beware the man of a single book.”
3. “We must love them both, those whose opinions we share and those whose opinions we reject, for both have labored in the search for truth, and both have helped us in finding it.”
4. “The things that we love tell us what we are.”
5. “There is nothing on this earth more to be prized than true friendship.”
6. “Grant me, O Lord my God, a mind to know you, a heart to seek you, wisdom to find you, conduct pleasing to you, faithful perseverance in waiting for you, and a hope of finally embracing you. Amen.”
7. “Fear is such a powerful emotion for humans that when we allow it to take us over, it drives compassion right out of our hearts.”
8. “Sorrow can be alleviated by good sleep, a bath and a glass of wine.”
9. “The study of philosophy is not that we may know what men have thought, but what the truth of things is.”
10. “The soul is like an uninhabited world that comes to life only when God lays His head against us.”
11. “Because philosophy arises from awe, a philosopher is bound in his way to be a lover of myths and poetic fables. Poets and philosophers are alike in being big with wonder.”
12. “Better to illuminate than merely to shine; to deliver to others contemplated truths than merely to contemplate.”
13. “Wonder is the desire of knowledge.”
14. “How is it they live in such harmony, the billions of stars, when most men can barely go a minute without declaring war in their minds?”
15. “Most men seem to live according to sense rather than reason.”
16. “Give us, O Lord, a steadfast heart, which no unworthy affection may drag downwards; give us an unconquered heart, which no tribulation can wear out; give us an upright heart, which no unworthy purpose may tempt aside. Bestow upon us also, O Lord our God, understanding to know you, diligence to seek you, wisdom to find you, and a faithfulness that may finally embrace you; through Jesus Christ our Lord.”
17. “I would rather feel compassion than know the meaning of it. I would hope to act with compassion without thinking of personal gain.”
18. “Rarely affirm, seldom deny, always distinguish.”
19. “Friendship is the source of the greatest pleasures, and without friends even the most agreeable pursuits become tedious.”
20. “Three things are necessary for the salvation of man: to know what he ought to believe; to know what he ought to desire; and to know what he ought to do.”
21. “Love follows knowledge.”
22. “If the highest aim of a captain were to preserve his ship, he would keep it in port forever.”
23. “There must be a first mover existing above all – and this we call God.”
24. “To love is to will the good of the other.”
25. “Grant, O Lord my God, that I may never fall away in success or in failure; that I may not be prideful in prosperity nor dejected in adversity. Let me rejoice only in what unites us and sorrow only in what separates us. May I strive to please no one or fear to displease anyone except Yourself. May I see always the things that are eternal and never those that are only temporal. May I shun any joy that is without You and never seek any that is beside You. O Lord, may I delight in any work I do for You and tire of any rest that is apart from You. My God, let me direct my heart towards You, and in my failings, always repent with a purpose of amendment.”
26. “The study of truth requires a considerable effort - which is why few are willing to undertake it out of love of knowledge - despite the fact that God has implanted a natural appetite for such knowledge in the minds of men.”
27. “The truth of our faith becomes a matter of ridicule among the infidels if any Catholic, not gifted with the necessary scientific learning, presents as dogma what scientific scrutiny shows to be false.”
28. “Faith has to do with things that are not seen, and hope with things that are not in hand.”
29. “It is necessary for the perfection of human society that there should be men who devote their lives to contemplation.”
30. “Man cannot live without joy; that is why one deprived of spiritual joys goes over to carnal pleasures.”
31. “Good can exist without evil, whereas evil cannot exist without good.”
32. “The highest perfection of human life consists in the mind of man being detached from care, for the sake of God.”
33. “Justice is a certain rectitude of mind whereby a man does what he ought to do in the circumstances confronting him.”
34. “A man has freedom of choice to the extent that he is rational.”
35. “Temperance is simply a disposition of the mind which sets bounds to the passions.”
36. “Happiness is secured through virtue; it is a good attained by man's own will.”
37. “The knowledge of God is the cause of things. For the knowledge of God is to all creatures what the knowledge of the artificer is to things made by his art.”
38. “Law is nothing else than an ordinance of reason for the common good, made by him who has care of the community.”
39. “Reason in man is rather like God in the world.”
40. “We can't have full knowledge all at once. We must start by believing; then afterwards we may be led on to master the evidence for ourselves.”
41. “The things that we love tell us what we are.”
42. “Mercy without justice is the mother of dissolution; justice without mercy is cruelty.”
43. “The soul is not in the body as in a place, but as in a subject; or as a form in matter.”
44. “A thing is not said to be unjust in itself but by comparison with another.”
45. “Every truth without exception—and whoever may utter it—is from the Holy Spirit.”
46. “There is nothing on earth more to be prized than true friendship.”
47. “As regards the individual nature, woman is defective and misbegotten, for the active power in the male seed tends to the production of a perfect likeness in the masculine sex; while the production of woman comes from defect in the active power or from some material indisposition, or even from some external influence.”
48. “The test of the artist does not lie in the will with which he goes to work, but in the excellence of the work he produces.”
49. “The knowledge of God is the cause of things. For the knowledge of God is to all creatures what the knowledge of the artificer is to things made by his art.”
50. “Perfection of moral good consists in conformity to reason."