"1. “I want to leave, to go somewhere where I should be really in my place, where I would fit in… but my place is nowhere; I am unwanted.”
2. “Life has no meaning the moment you lose the illusion of being eternal.”
3. “Anything, anything would be better than this agony of mind, this creeping pain that gnaws and fumbles and caresses one and never hurts quite enough.”
4. “Hell is other people.”
5. “We do not know what we want and yet we are responsible for what we are — that is the fact.”
6. “Everything has been figured out, except how to live.”
7. “Every existing thing is born without reason, prolongs itself out of weakness, and dies by chance.”
8. “We must act out passion before we can feel it.”
9. “Man is not the sum of what he has already, but rather the sum of what he does not yet have, of what he could have.”
10. “Three o’clock is always too late or too early for anything you want to do.”
11. “One is still what one is going to cease to be and already what one is going to become. One lives one’s death, one dies one’s life.”
12. “God is absence. God is the solitude of man.”
13. “Man is a useless passion.”
14. “Man is condemned to be free; because once thrown into the world, he is responsible for everything he does.”
15. “Nothingness haunts being.”
16. “Life begins on the other side of despair.”
17. “All human activities are equivalent… and… all are on principle doomed to failure.”
18. “It is certain that we cannot escape anguish, for we are anguish.”
19. “I know. I know that I shall never again meet anything or anybody who will inspire me with passion. You know, it’s quite a job starting to love somebody. You have to have energy, generosity, blindness. There is even a moment, in the very beginning, when you have to jump across a precipice: if you think about it you don’t do it. I know I’ll never jump again.”
20. “Words are loaded pistols.”
21. “I am no longer sure of anything. If I satiate my desires, I sin but I deliver myself from them; if I refuse to satisfy them, they infect the whole soul.”
22. “One always dies too soon — or too late. And yet, life is there, finished: the line is drawn, and it must all be added up. You are nothing other than your life.”
23. “Our responsibility is much greater than we might have supposed, because it involves all mankind.”
24. “Like all dreamers, I mistook disenchantment for truth.”
25. “Ah! How I hate the crimes of the new generation: they are dry and sterile as darnel.”
26. “Time is too large, it can’t be filled up. Everything you plunge into it is stretched and disintegrates.”
27. “To eat is to appropriate by destruction.”
28. “Nothingness lies coiled at the heart of being like a worm.”
29. “Don’t you feel the same way? When I cannot see myself, even though I touch myself, I wonder if I really exist.”
30. “I exist, that is all, and I find it nauseating.”
31. “Before you come alive, life is nothing; it’s up to you to give it a meaning, and value is nothing else but the meaning that you choose.”
32. “Every word has consequences. Every silence, too.”
33. “If you are lonely when you’re alone, you are in bad company.”
34. “What is life but an unpleasant interruption to a peaceful nonexistence.”
35. “We are our choices.”
36. “There may be more beautiful times, but this one is ours.”
37. “Freedom is what you do with what’s been done to you.”
38. “Only the guy who isn’t rowing has time to rock the boat.”
39. “Man is nothing else but what he purposes, he exists only in so far as he realizes himself, he is therefore nothing else but the sum of his actions, nothing else but what his life is.”
40. “The worst part about being lied to is knowing you weren’t worth the truth.”
41. “I can always choose, but I ought to know that if I do not choose, I am still choosing.”
42. “We make our own hell out of the people around us.”
43. “He who asks a question is a fool for a minute; he who does not remains a fool forever.”
44. “When you realize that by changing your perspective, big things can be seen as little things, it becomes much harder to worry about anything.”
45. “Commitment is an act, not a word.”
46. “Sometimes the truth is too simple for intellectuals.”
47. “In a word, man must create his own essence: it is in throwing himself into the world, suffering there, struggling there, that he gradually defines himself.”
48. “There is only one day left, always starting over: it is given to us at dawn and taken away from us at dusk.”
49. “The individual’s duty is to do what he wants to do, to think whatever he likes, to be accountable to no one but himself, to challenge every idea and every person.”
50. “The best work is not what is most difficult for you; it is what you do best.”
51. “Because we can imagine, we are free.”
52. “We are possessed by the things we possess. When I like an object, I always give it to someone. It isn’t generosity—it’s only because I want others to be enslaved by objects, not me.”
53. “We only become what we are by the radical and deep-seated refusal of that which others have made of us.”
54. “Your judgement judges you and defines you.”
55. “To know what life is worth you have to risk it once in a while.”
56. “I have changed as everyone changes: within a permanency.”
57. “I am my body. At least so far as my experience goes. But also my body is something else; it is a thing.”
58. “If I became a philosopher, if I so keenly sought this fame for which I’m still waiting, it was all in order to seduce women basically.”
59. “I did not think, therefore I was a flute.”
60. “My thought is me: that’s why I can’t stop. I exist because I think… and I can’t stop myself from thinking.”
61. “To be is to be there."