"1. “Being deeply loved by someone gives you strength, while loving someone deeply gives you courage.”
2. “Simplicity, patience, compassion. These three are your greatest treasures. Simple in actions and thoughts, you return to the source of being. Patient with both friends and enemies, you accord with the way things are. Compassionate toward yourself, you reconcile all beings in the world.”
3. “The journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.”
4. “Knowing others is intelligence; knowing yourself is true wisdom. Mastering others is strength; mastering yourself is true power.”
5. “Life is a series of natural and spontaneous changes. Don't resist them; that only creates sorrow. Let reality be reality. Let things flow naturally forward in whatever way they like.”
6. “A good traveler has no fixed plans and is not intent on arriving.”
7. “Those who know do not speak. Those who speak do not know.”
8. “When you are content to be simply yourself and don't compare or compete, everyone will respect you.”
9. “The truth is not always beautiful, nor beautiful words the truth.”
10. “Time is a created thing. To say 'I don't have time,' is like saying, 'I don't want to.'”
11. “The best fighter is never angry.”
12. “If you are depressed you are living in the past. If you are anxious you are living in the future. If you are at peace you are living in the present.”
13. “Because one believes in oneself, one doesn't try to convince others. Because one is content with oneself, one doesn't need others' approval. Because one accepts oneself, the whole world accepts him or her.”
14. “A man with outward courage dares to die; a man with inner courage dares to live.”
15. “Care about what other people think and you will always be their prisoner.”
16. “Nature does not hurry, yet everything is accomplished.”
17. “Be content with what you have; rejoice in the way things are. When you realize there is nothing lacking, the whole world belongs to you.”
18. “At the center of your being you have the answer; you know who you are and you know what you want.”
19. “Do you have the patience to wait until your mud settles and the water is clear?”
20. “The flame that burns twice as bright burns half as long.”
21. “Silence is a source of Great Strength.”
22. “If you understand others you are smart. If you understand yourself you are illuminated. If you overcome others you are powerful. If you overcome yourself you have strength. If you know how to be satisfied you are rich. If you can act with vigor, you have a will. If you don't lose your objectives you can be long-lasting. If you die without loss, you are eternal.”
23. “Stop thinking, and end your problems.”
24. “Kindness in words creates confidence. Kindness in thinking creates profoundness. Kindness in giving creates love.”
25. “Manifest plainness, Embrace simplicity, Reduce selfishness, Have few desires.”
26. “A leader is best when people barely know he exists. Of a good leader, who talks little, when his work is done, his aim fulfilled, they will say, 'We did this ourselves.'”
27. “Music in the soul can be heard by the universe.”
28. “Respond intelligently even to unintelligent treatment.”
29. “Act without expectation.”
30. “He who knows that enough is enough will always have enough.”
31. “Health is the greatest possession. Contentment is the greatest treasure. Confidence is the greatest friend. Non-being is the greatest joy.”
32. “I have just three things to teach: simplicity, patience, compassion. These three are your greatest treasures.”
33. “When I let go of what I am, I become what I might be.”
34. “Water is the softest thing, yet it can penetrate mountains and earth. This shows clearly the principle of softness overcoming hardness.”
35. “Mastering others is strength. Mastering yourself is true power.”
36. “He who is contented is rich.”
37. “To the mind that is still, the whole universe surrenders.”
38. “Great acts are made up of small deeds.”
39. “If you want to awaken all of humanity, then awaken all of yourself.”
40. “When you realize there is nothing lacking, the whole world belongs to you.”
41. “The key to growth is the introduction of higher dimensions of consciousness into our awareness.”
42. “To attain knowledge, add things every day. To attain wisdom, subtract things every day.”
43. “By letting it go it all gets done. The world is won by those who let it go. But when you try and try, the world is beyond the winning.”
44. “Fill your bowl to the brim and it will spill. Keep sharpening your knife and it will blunt.”
45. “Chase after money and security and your heart will never unclench. Care about people’s approval and you will be their prisoner.”
46. “Do your work, then step back. The only path to serenity.”
47. “The wise man is one who knows what he does not know.”
48. “To know yet to think that one does not know is best; Not to know yet to think that one knows will lead to difficulty.”
49. “The soft overcomes the hard; the slow overcomes the fast.”
50. “New beginnings are often disguised as painful endings."