"1. “It is not that I am mad, it is only that my head is different from yours.”
2. “Alexander the Great found the philosopher looking attentively at a pile of human bones. Diogenes explained, 'I am searching for the bones of your father but cannot distinguish them from those of a slave.'”
3. “Of what use is a philosopher who doesn't hurt anybody's feelings?”
4. “In a rich man's house there is no place to spit but his face.”
5. “It is the privilege of the gods to want nothing, and of godlike men to want little.”
6. “I am a citizen of the world.”
7. “A philosopher named Aristippus, who had quite willingly sucked up to Dionysus and won himself a spot at his court, saw Diogenes cooking lentils for a meal. 'If you would only learn to compliment Dionysus, you wouldn't have to live on lentils.' Diogenes replied, 'But if you would only learn to live on lentils, you wouldn't have to flatter Dionysus.'”
8. “The foundation of every state is the education of its youth.”
9. “It takes a wise man to discover a wise man.”
10. “Dogs and philosophers do the greatest good and get the fewest rewards.”
11. “When some one reminded him that the people of Sinope had sentenced him to exile, he said, 'And I sentenced them to stay at home.'”
12. “I have nothing to ask but that you would remove to the other side, that you may not, by intercepting the sunshine, take from me what you cannot give.”
13. “Blushing is the color of virtue.”
14. “The art of being a slave is to rule one's master.”
15. “No man is hurt but by himself.”
16. “Poverty is a virtue which one can teach oneself.”
17. “Once he saw the officials of a temple leading away some one who had stolen a bowl belonging to the treasurers, and said, 'The great thieves are leading away the little thief.'”
18. “What I like to drink most is wine that belongs to others.”
19. “To one who asked what was the proper time for lunch, he said, 'If a rich man, when you will; if a poor man, when you can.'”
20. “When people laughed at him because he walked backward beneath the portico, he said to them: 'Aren't you ashamed, you who walk backward along the whole path of existence, and blame me for walking backward along the path of the promenade?'”
21. “The only way to gall and fret effectively is for yourself to be a good and honest man.”
22. “I am Diogenes the Dog. I nuzzle the kind, bark at the greedy and bite scoundrels.”
23. “Behold! I've brought you a man.”
24. “The insult dishonors the one who infers it, not the one who receives it.”
25. “If I gained one thing from philosophy it is that, at the very least, I am well prepared to confront any change in fortune.”
26. “As a matter of self-preservation, a man needs good friends or ardent enemies, for the former instruct him and the latter take him to task.”
27. “He has the most who is most content with the least.”
28. “I threw my cup away when I saw a child drinking from his hands at the trough.”
29. “Stand a little less between me and the sun.”
30. “Most men are within a finger's breadth of being mad.”
31. “The sun too penetrates into privies, but is not polluted by them.”
32. “The mob is the mother of tyrants.”
33. “Those who have virtue always in their mouths, and neglect it in practice, are like a harp, which emits a sound pleasing to others, while itself is insensible of the music.”
34. “I am called a dog because I fawn on those who give me anything, I yelp at those who refuse, and I set my teeth in rascals.”
35. “Why not whip the teacher when the pupil misbehaves?”
36. “When I look upon seamen, men of science and philosophers, man is the wisest of all beings; when I look upon priests and prophets nothing is as contemptible as man.”
37. “There is only a finger's difference between a wise man and a fool.”
38. “Man is the most intelligent of the animals - and the most silly.”
39. “I do not know whether there are gods, but there ought to be.”
40. “Calumny is only the noise of madmen.”
41. “We have two ears and one tongue so that we would listen more and talk less.”
42. “Modesty is the color of virtue.”
43. “I know nothing, except the fact of my ignorance.
44. “Here is Plato's man.”
45. “If you are to be kept right, you must possess either good friends or red-hot enemies. The one will warn you, the other will expose you.”
46. “I am a spy upon your insatiable greed.”
47. “Other dogs bite only their enemies, whereas I bite also my friends in order to save them.”
48. “Boasting, like gilded armour, is very different inside from outside.” 
49. “He once begged alms of a statue, and, when asked why he did so, replied, 'To get practice in being refused.'” 
50. “A quiet death is the one sure means of freedom.”




"