"1. “By three methods we may learn wisdom: First, by reflection, which is noblest; Second, by imitation, which is easiest; and third by experience, which is the bitterest.”
2. “It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.”
3. “Everything has beauty, but not everyone sees it.”
4. “Wheresoever you go, go with all your heart.”
5. “He who knows all the answers has not been asked all the questions.”
6. “The man who moves a mountain begins by carrying away small stones.”
7. “Life is really simple, but we insist on making it complicated.”
8. “If you make a mistake and do not correct it, this is called a mistake.”
9. “Study the past if you would define the future.”
10. “Before you embark on a journey of revenge, dig two graves.”
11. “The funniest people are the saddest ones.”
12. “To be wronged is nothing, unless you continue to remember it.”
13. “The man who asks a question is a fool for a minute, the man who does not ask is a fool for life.”
14. “Respect yourself and others will respect you.”
15. “When you see a good person, think of becoming like her/him. When you see someone not so good, reflect on your own weak points.”
16. “Attack the evil that is within yourself, rather than attacking the evil that is in others.”
17. “Silence is a true friend who never betrays.”
18. “You cannot open a book without learning something.”
19. “What the superior man seeks is in himself; what the small man seeks is in others.”
20. “We have two lives, and the second begins when we realize we only have one.”
21. “I hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand.”
22. “The hardest thing of all is to find a black cat in a dark room, especially if there is no cat.”
23. “Music produces a kind of pleasure which human nature cannot do without.”
24. “The gem cannot be polished without friction, nor man perfected without trials.”
25. “Give a bowl of rice to a man and you will feed him for a day. Teach him how to grow his own rice and you will save his life.”
26. “The way out is through the door. Why is it that no one will use this method?”
27. “It is not the failure of others to appreciate your abilities that should trouble you, but rather your failure to appreciate theirs.”
28. “The man of wisdom is never of two minds; the man of benevolence never worries; the man of courage is never afraid.”
29. “Only the wisest and stupidest of men never change.”
30. “It is more shameful to distrust our friends than to be deceived by them.”
31. “Our greatest glory is not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.”
32. “When anger rises, think of the consequences.”
33. “To see what is right and not do it is the want of courage.”
34. “He who learns but does not think is lost. He who thinks but does not learn is in great danger.”
35. “The man who says he can, and the man who says he cannot, are both correct.”
36. “Choose a job you love, and you will never have to work a day in your life.”
37. “If you think in terms of a year, plant a seed; if in terms of ten years, plant trees; if in terms of 100 years, teach the people.”
38. “To practice five things under all circumstances constitutes perfect virtue; these five are gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity, earnestness, and kindness.”
39. “When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.”
40. “Without feelings of respect, what is there to distinguish men from beasts?”
41. “Wisdom, compassion, and courage are the three universally recognized moral qualities of men.”
42. “The more man meditates upon good thoughts, the better will be his world and the world at large.”
43. “Do not impose on others what you yourself do not desire.”
44. “If I am walking with two other men, each of them will serve as my teacher. I will pick out the good points of the one and imitate them, and the bad points of the other and correct them in myself.”
45. “When we see persons of worth, we should think of equaling them; when we see persons of a contrary character, we should turn inwards and examine ourselves.”
46. “To go beyond is as wrong as to fall short.”
47. “The expectations of life depend upon diligence; the mechanic that would perfect his work must first sharpen his tools.”
48. “Virtue is not left to stand alone. He who practices it will have neighbors.”
49. “He who speaks without modesty will find it difficult to make his words good.”
50. “A man is great not because he hasn't failed; a man is great because failure hasn't stopped him.”"