"1. “The only way to deal with an unfree world is to become so absolutely free that your very existence is an act of rebellion.”
2. “You will never be happy if you continue to search for what happiness consists of. You will never live if you are looking for the meaning of life.”
3. “Basically, at the very bottom of life, which seduces us all, there is only absurdity, and more absurdity. And maybe that's what gives us our joy for living, because the only thing that can defeat absurdity is lucidity.”
4. “But what is happiness except the simple harmony between a man and the life he leads?”
5. “The welfare of the people in particular has always been the alibi of tyrants.”
6. “A man's work is nothing but this slow trek to rediscover, through the detours of art, those two or three great and simple images in whose presence his heart first opened.”
7. “I should like to be able to love my country and still love justice.”
8. “The struggle itself towards the heights is enough to fill a man's heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy.”
9. “Friendship often ends in love, but love in friendship - never.”
10. “Man wants to live, but it is useless to hope that this desire will dictate all his actions.”
11. “The modern mind is in complete disarray. Knowledge has stretched itself to the point where neither the world nor our intelligence can find any foot-hold. It is a fact that we are suffering from nihilism.”
12. “The need to be right is the sign of a vulgar mind.”
13. “In the depth of winter I finally learned that there was in me an invincible summer.”
14. “Nothing is more despicable than respect based on fear.”
15. “Autumn is a second spring when every leaf is a flower.”
16. “The myth of unlimited production brings war in its train as inevitably as clouds announce a storm.”
17. “Real generosity toward the future lies in giving all to the present.”
18. “Every act of rebellion expresses a nostalgia for innocence and an appeal to the essence of being.”
19. “All great deeds and all great thoughts have a ridiculous beginning. Great works are often born on a street corner or in a restaurant's revolving door.”
20. “An intellectual is someone whose mind watches itself.”
21. “A taste for truth at any cost is a passion which spares nothing.”
22. “Each generation doubtless feels called upon to reform the world. Mine knows that it will not reform it, but its task is perhaps even greater. It consists in preventing the world from destroying itself.”
23. “The gods had condemned Sisyphus to ceaselessly rolling a rock to the top of a mountain, whence the stone would fall back of its own weight. They had thought with some reason that there is no more dreadful punishment than futile and hopeless labor.”
24. “All that I know most surely about morality and obligations I owe to football.”
25. “Men are convinced of your arguments, your sincerity, and the seriousness of your efforts only by your death.”
26. “A man without ethics is a wild beast loosed upon this world.”
27. “Nobody realizes that some people expend tremendous energy merely to be normal.”
28. “He who despairs of the human condition is a coward, but he who has hope for it is a fool.”
29. “By definition, a government has no conscience. Sometimes it has a policy, but nothing more.”
30. “There is but one truly serious philosophical problem and that is suicide.”
31. “We get into the habit of living before acquiring the habit of thinking. In that race which daily hastens us towards death, the body maintains its irreparable lead.”
32. “Judging whether life is or is not worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy.”
33. “The only real progress lies in learning to be wrong all alone.”
34. “At any street corner the feeling of absurdity can strike any man in the face.”
35. “Alas, after a certain age every man is responsible for his face.”
36. “No cause justifies the deaths of innocent people.”
37. “Every revolutionary ends up either by becoming an oppressor or a heretic.”
38. “To correct a natural indifference I was placed half-way between misery and the sun. Misery kept me from believing that all was well under the sun, and the sun taught me that history wasn't everything.”
39. “Without work, all life goes rotten. But when work is soulless, life stifles and dies.”
40. “It is a kind of spiritual snobbery that makes people think they can be happy without money.”
41. “Stupidity has a knack of getting its way.”
42. “In order to exist, man must rebel, but rebellion must respect the limits that it discovers in itself - limits where minds meet, and in meeting, begin to exist.”
43. “To know oneself, one should assert oneself.”
44. “Man is the only creature that refuses to be what he is.”
45. “A guilty conscience needs to confess. A work of art is a confession.”
46. “Against eternal injustice, man must assert justice, and to protest against the universe of grief, he must create happiness.”
47. “Don't believe your friends when they ask you to be honest with them. All they really want is to be maintained in the good opinion they have of themselves.”
48. “Without freedom, no art; art lives only on the restraints it imposes on itself, and dies of all others.”
49. “Some people talk in their sleep. Lecturers talk while other people sleep.”
50. “Real nobility is based on scorn, courage, and profound indifference.”
51. “We used to wonder where war lived, what it was that made it so vile. And now we realize that we know where it lives... inside ourselves.”
52. “When you have really exhausted an experience you always reverence and love it.”
53. “Violence is both unavoidable and unjustifiable.”
54. “For if there is a sin against life, it consists perhaps not so much in despairing of life as in hoping for another life and in eluding the implacable grandeur of this life.”
55. “We continue to shape our personality all our life. If we knew ourselves perfectly, we should die.”
56. “Don't wait for the last judgment - it takes place every day.”
57. “The artist forges himself to the others, midway between the beauty he cannot do without and the community he cannot tear himself away from. That is why true artists scorn nothing: they are obliged to understand rather than to judge.”
58. “All modern revolutions have ended in a reinforcement of the power of the State.”
59. “I draw from the Absurd three consequences: my revolt, my liberty, my passion.”
60. “We always deceive ourselves twice about the people we love - first to their advantage, then to their disadvantage.”
61. “As a remedy to life in society I would suggest the big city. Nowadays, it is the only desert within our means.”
62. “Virtue cannot separate itself from reality without becoming a principle of evil.”
63. “There is no fate that cannot be surmounted by scorn.”
64. “Charm is a way of getting the answer 'Yes' without asking a clear question.”
65. “The only really committed artist is he who, without refusing to take part in the combat, at least refuses to join the regular armies and remains a freelance.”
66. “We rarely confide in those who are better than we are.”
67. “Truth is mysterious, elusive, always to be conquered. Liberty is dangerous, as hard to live with as it is elating. We must march toward these two goals, painfully but resolutely, certain in advance of our failings on so long a road.”
68. “A free press can, of course, be good or bad, but, most certainly without freedom, the press will never be anything but bad.”
69. “There is in me an anarchy and frightful disorder. Creating makes me die a thousand deaths, because it means making order, and my entire being rebels against order. But without it I would die, scattered to the winds.”
70. “Conscious of not being able to separate myself from my time, I have decided to become part of it.”
71. “The absurd depends as much on man as on the world. For the moment, it is all that links them together.”
72. “Heroism is accessible. Happiness is more difficult.”
73. “Martyrs, my friend, have to choose between being forgotten, mocked or used. As for being understood - never.”
74. “Rebellion cannot exist without the feeling that somewhere, in some way, you are justified.”
75. “I grew up with the sea, and poverty for me was sumptuous; then I lost the sea and found all luxuries gray and poverty unbearable.”
76. “Only a philosophy of eternity, in the world today, could justify non-violence.”
77. “Every man needs slaves like he needs clean air. To rule is to breathe, is it not? And even the most disenfranchised get to breathe. The lowest on the social scale have their spouses or their children.”
78. “Every artist preserves deep within him a single source from which, throughout his lifetime, he draws what he is, and what he says. When the source dries up, the work withers and crumbles.”
79. “One leader, one people, signifies one master and millions of slaves.”
80. “The desire for possession is insatiable, to such a point that it can survive even love itself. To love, therefore, is to sterilize the person one loves.”
81. “I know of only one duty, and that is to love.”
82. “Without culture, and the relative freedom it implies, society, even when perfect, is but a jungle. This is why any authentic creation is a gift to the future.”
83. “Ah, mon cher, for anyone who is alone, without God and without a master, the weight of days is dreadful.”
84. “What is a rebel? A man who says no: but whose refusal does not imply a renunciation.”
85. “In order to speak about all and to all, one has to speak of what all know and of the reality common to us all. The sea, rains, necessity, desire, the struggle against death... these are things that unite us all.”
86. “Your successes and happiness are forgiven you only if you generously consent to share them.”
87. “Culture: the cry of men in face of their destiny.”
88. “What the world requires of the Christians is that they should continue to be Christians.”
89. “Truly fertile Music, the only kind that will move us, that we shall truly appreciate, will be a Music conducive to Dream, which banishes all reason and analysis. One must not wish first to understand and then to feel. Art does not tolerate Reason.”
90. “It is normal to give away a little of one's life in order not to lose it all.”
91. “We call first truths those we discover after all the others.”
92. “I was born poor and without religion, under a happy sky, feeling harmony, not hostility, in nature. I began not by feeling torn, but in plenitude.”
93. “The day when I am no more than a writer I shall cease to be a writer.”
94. “We are all special cases.”
95. “How hard, how bitter it is to become a man!”
96. “Every great work makes the human face more admirable and richer, and that is its whole secret.”
97. “Man is an idea, and a precious small idea once he turns his back on love.”
98. “Men are never really willing to die except for the sake of freedom: therefore they do not believe in dying completely.”
99. “To govern means to pillage, as everyone knows.”
100. “After all manner of professors have done their best for us, the place we are to get knowledge is in books. The true university of these days is a collection of books.”
101. “I am not made for politics because I am incapable of wanting or accepting the death of the adversary.”
102. “Why should it be essential to love rarely in order to love much?”
103. “I have never been able to renounce the light, the pleasure of being, and the freedom in which I grew up.”
104. “Too many have dispensed with generosity in order to practice charity.”
105. “To be famous, in fact, one has only to kill one's landlady.”
106. “There will be no lasting peace either in the heart of individuals or in social customs until death is outlawed.”
107. “Lying is not only saying what isn't true. It is also, in fact especially, saying more than is true and, in the case of the human heart, saying more than one feels. We all do it, every day, to make life simpler.”
108. “The real passion of the twentieth century is servitude.”
109. “Those who weep for the happy periods which they encounter in history acknowledge what they want; not the alleviation but the silencing of misery.”
110. “Those who write clearly have readers, those who write obscurely have commentators.”
111. “Freedom is nothing but a chance to be better.”
112. “Man stands face to face with the irrational. He feels within him his longing for happiness and for reason. The absurd is born of this confrontation between the human need and the unreasonable silence of the world.”
113. “Mother used to say that however miserable one is, there’s always something to be thankful for. And each morning, when the sky brightened and light began to flood my cell, I agreed with her.”
114. “The absurd is the essential concept and the first truth.”
115. “Existence is illusory and it is eternal.”
116. “Of whom and of what can I say: 'I know that'! This heart within me I can feel, and I judge that it exists. This world I can touch, and I likewise judge that it exists. There ends all my knowledge, and the rest is construction. For if I try to seize this self of which I feel sure, if I try to define and to summarize it, it is nothing but water slipping through my fingers. I can sketch one by one all the aspects it is able to assume, all those likewise that have been attributed to it, this upbringing, this origin, this ardor or these silences, this nobility or this vileness. But aspects cannot be added up. This very heart which is mine will forever remain indefinable to me. Between the certainty I have of my existence and the content I try to give to that assurance the gap will never be filled.”
117. “The human heart has a tiresome tendency to label as fate only what crushes it. But happiness likewise, in its way, is without reason, since it is inevitable.”
118. “And here are trees and I know their gnarled surface, water and I feel its taste. These scents of grass and stars at night, certain evenings when the heart relaxes—how shall I negate this world whose power and strength I feel? Yet all the knowledge on earth will give me nothing to assure me that this world is mine. You describe it to me and you teach me to classify it. You enumerate its laws and in my thirst for knowledge I admit that they are true. You take apart its mechanism and my hope increases. At the final stage you teach me that this wondrous and multicolored universe can be reduced to the atom and that the atom itself can be reduced to the electron. All this is good and I wait for you to continue. But you tell me of an invisible planetary system in which electrons gravitate around a nucleus. You explain this world to me with an image. I realize then that you have been reduced to poetry: I shall never know.”
119. “If I convince myself that this life has no other aspect than that of the absurd, if I feel that its whole equilibrium depends on that perpetual opposition between my conscious revolt and the darkness in which it struggles, if I admit that my freedom has no meaning except in relation to its limited fate, then I must say that what counts is not the best living but the most living.”
120. “Men, too, secrete the inhuman. At certain moments of lucidity, the mechanical aspect of their gestures, their meaningless pantomime makes silly everything that surrounds them. A man is talking on the telephone behind a glass partition; you cannot hear him, but you see his incomprehensible dumb show: you wonder why he is alive. This discomfort in the face of man’s own inhumanity, this incalculable tumble before the image of what we are, this 'nausea,' as a writer of today calls it, is also the absurd.”
121. “Weariness comes at the end of the acts of a mechanical life, but at the same time it inaugurates the impulse of consciousness. It awakens consciousness and provokes what follows. What follows is the gradual return into the chain or it is the definitive awakening. At the end of the awakening comes, in time, the consequence: suicide or recovery. In itself weariness has something sickening about it. Here, I must conclude that it is good. For everything begins with consciousness and nothing is worth anything except through it.”
122. “A day comes when a man notices or says that he is thirty. Thus he asserts his youth. But simultaneously he situates himself in relation to time. He takes his place in it. He admits that he stands at a certain point on a curve that he acknowledges having to travel to its end. He belongs to time, and by the horror that seizes him, he recognizes his worst enemy. Tomorrow, he was longing for tomorrow, whereas everything in him ought to reject it.”
123. “To will is to stir up paradoxes.”
124. “A fate is not a punishment.”
125. “Can one be a saint without God? (...) - Heroism and sanctity don't really appeal to me . . . What interests me is - being a man.”
126. “The realization that life is absurd cannot be an end, but only a beginning. This is a truth nearly all great minds have taken as their starting point."