"1. “The insatiable will always finds a way to detain its creatures in life and compel them to live on, by means of an illusion spread over things.”
2. “Knowledge kills action, for action requires a state of being in which we are covered with the veil of illusion.”
3. “It is only as an aesthetic phenomenon that existence and the world are eternally justified.”
4. “[The art of] tragedy transforms those repulsive thoughts about the terrible or absurd nature of existence into representations with which man can live.”
5. “One has to take a somewhat bold and dangerous line with this existence: especially as, whatever happens, we are bound to lose it.”
6. “We labor at our daily work more ardently and thoughtlessly than is necessary to sustain our life because it is even more necessary not to have leisure to stop and think. Haste is universal because everyone is in flight from himself.”
7. “Life has not been devised by morality: it wants deception, it lives on deception.”
8. “Consider the cattle, grazing as they pass you by: they do not know what is meant by yesterday or today, they leap about, eat, rest, digest, leap about again, and so from morn till night and from day to day, fettered to the moment and its pleasure or displeasure, and thus neither melancholy nor bored. This is a hard sight for man to see; for, though he thinks himself better than the animals because he is human, he cannot help envying them their happiness – what they have, a life neither bored nor painful, is precisely what he wants, yet he cannot have it because he refuses to be like an animal…”
9. “Amazingly, the most obvious question fails to occur to our scholars: what is their work, their hurry, their painful frenzy supposed to be for?”
10. “Every tradition grows ever more venerable — the more remote its origin, the more confused that origin is. The reverence due to it increases from generation to generation. The tradition finally becomes holy and inspires awe.”
11. “To escape boredom, man works either beyond what his usual needs require, or else he invents play, that is, work that is designed to quiet no need other than that for working in general.”
12. “Christianity came into existence to lighten the heart, but now it needs to burden the heart to start with so it can lighten it afterwards. Consequently, it will perish.”
13. “In reality, hope is the worst of all evils, because it prolongs the torments of man.”
14. “A few hours’ mountain climbing make of a rogue and a saint two fairly equal creatures.”
15. “Admiration for a quality or an art can be so strong that it deters us from striving to possess it.”
16. “The first opinion that occurs to us when we are suddenly asked about a matter is usually not our own, but only the customary one, appropriate to our caste, position, or parentage; our own opinions seldom swim near the surface.”
17. “A man far oftener appears to have a decided character from persistently following his temperament than from persistently following his principles.”
18. “Wherever there is madness there is also a grain of genius and wisdom… All superior men who were irresistibly drawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had, if they were not actually mad, no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad.”
19. “Christianity has done its utmost to close the circle and declared even doubt to be sin. One is supposed to be cast into belief without reason, by a miracle, and from then on to swim in it as in the brightest and least ambiguous of elements: even a glance towards land, even the thought that one perhaps exists for something else as well as swimming, even the slightest impulse of our amphibious nature — is sin! And notice that all this means that the foundation of belief and all reflection on its origin is likewise excluded as sinful. What is wanted are blindness and intoxication and an eternal song over the waves in which reason has drowned.”
20. “Moderation sees itself as beautiful; it is unaware that in the eye of the immoderate it appears black and sober and consequently ugly-looking.”
21. “The surest way to corrupt a youth is to instruct them to hold in higher esteem those who think alike than those who think differently.”
22. “For those who need consolation no means of consolation is so effective as the assertion that in their case no consolation is possible: it implies so great a degree of distinction that they at once hold up their heads again.”
23. “All these bold birds who fly out into the wide, widest open—it is true! At some point they will not be able to fly any farther and will squat down on some pylon or sparse crag—and very grateful for this miserable accommodation to boot! But who would want to conclude from this that there was no longer a vast and prodigious trajectory ahead of them, that they had flown as far and wide as one could fly! All our great mentors and precursors have finally come to a stop, and it is hardly the noblest and most graceful of gestures with which fatigue comes to a stop: it will also happen to you and me! Of what concern, however, is that to you and me! Other birds will fly farther!”
24. “I want to learn more and more to see as beautiful what is necessary in things; then I shall be one of those who make things beautiful. Amor fati [love of fate]: let that be my love henceforth! I do not want to wage war against what is ugly. I do not want to accuse; I do not even want to accuse those who accuse. Looking away shall be my only negation. And all in all and on the whole: someday I wish to be only a Yes-sayer.”
25. “The secret of the greatest fruitfulness and the greatest enjoyment of existence is: to live dangerously!”
26. “Looking for work in order to be paid: in civilized countries today almost all men are at one in doing that. For all of them work is a means and not an end in itself. Hence they are not very refined in their choice of work, if only it pays well. But there are, if only rarely, men who would rather perish than work without any pleasure in their work. They are choosy, hard to satisfy, and do not care for ample rewards, if the work itself is not to be the reward of rewards. Artists and contemplative men of all kinds belong to this rare breed, but so do even those men of leisure who spend their lives hunting, traveling, or in love affairs and adventures. All of these desire work and misery only if it is associated with pleasure, and the hardest, most difficult work if necessary. Otherwise their idleness is resolute, even if it spells impoverishment, dishonor, and danger to life and limb. They do not fear boredom as much as work without pleasure.”
27. “To stand in the midst of ... this whole marvelous uncertainty and rich ambiguity in existence without questioning, without trembling with the craving and the rapture of such questioning ... that is what I feel to be contemptible, and this is the feeling for which I look first in everybody. Some folly keeps persuading me that every human has this feeling just because he is human.”
28. “Keeping up appearances, living in borrowed finery, wearing masks, the drapery of convention, play-acting for the benefit of others and oneself ... the constant fluttering of human beings around the one flame of vanity is so much the rule and the law that there is virtually nothing which defies understanding so much as the fact that an honest and pure drive towards truth should ever have emerged in them. They are deeply immersed in illusions and dream-images; their eyes merely glide across the surface of things and see ‘forms’; nowhere does their perception lead to truth.”
29. “Pity is the most agreeable feeling among those who have little pride and no prospects of great conquests.”
30. “Possessions are generally diminished by possession.”
31. “God is dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him. How shall we comfort ourselves, the murderers of all murderers? What was holiest and mightiest of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under our knives: who will wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean ourselves? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must we ourselves not become gods simply to appear worthy of it?”
32. “God is dead: but considering the state of the species Man is in, there will perhaps be caves, for ages yet, in which his shadow will be shown.”
33. “From such abysses, from such severe sickness… one must return newborn, having shed one’s skin, more ticklish and malicious, with a more delicate taste for joy, with a tenderer tongue for all good things, with merrier senses, with a second dangerous innocence in joy, more childlike and yet a hundred times subtler than one has ever been before.”
34. “To ‘give style’ to one’s character — a great and rare art! It is practiced by those who survey all the strengths and weaknesses that their nature has to offer and then fit them into an artistic plan until each appears as art and reason and even weaknesses delight the eye. Here a great mass of second nature has been added; there a piece of first nature removed — both times through long practice and daily work at it. Here the ugly that could not be removed is concealed; there it is reinterpreted into sublimity. Much that is vague and resisted shaping has been saved and employed for distant views—it is supposed to beckon towards the remote and immense. In the end, when the work is complete, it becomes clear how it was the force of a single taste that ruled and shaped everything great and small…”
35. “Man is something to be surpassed.”
36. “Distrust all in whom the impulse to punish is powerful.”
37. “God is a thought which makes crooked all that is straight.”
38. “How many things are now called the worst evil, which are only twelve feet wide and three months long! But some day greater dragons will come into the world.”
39. “In solitude there grows what anyone brings into it, the inner beast too. Therefore solitude is inadvisable to many.”
40. “What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment. And just the same shall be man to the Übermensch: a laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment.”
41. “They vomit their gall and call it a newspaper.”
42. “Now I bid you lose me and find yourselves; and only when you have all denied me will I return to you.”
43. “I tell you: one must still have chaos in oneself to be able to give birth to a dancing star. I tell you: you still have chaos in yourselves.”
44. “Verily, man is a polluted river. One must be a sea, to receive a polluted river without becoming impure.”
45. “The now and the past on earth—alas! my friends—that is my most unbearable burden; and I should not know how to live if I were not a seer of that which must come.”
46. “Alas, my animal, have I too spoken like you? And have I not willed myself what I said? Do I too not belong to the furious and the lustful? —Thus spoke the dwarf. And he bit his finger with lust and fury at the word. And Zarathustra was moved and looked at his animal amazed. So much soul spoke from his hand and his eye!—Thus Zarathustra spoke.”
47. “There is always some madness in love. But there is also always some reason in madness.”
48. “And life itself confided this secret to me: ‘Behold,’ it said, ‘I am that which must always overcome itself. Indeed, you call it a will to procreate or a drive to an end, to something higher, farther, more manifold: but all this is one, one secret.’”
49. “What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not an end.”
50. “Man is a rope, tied between beast and Übermensch—a rope over an abyss.”
51. “I love those who do not know how to live, except by going under, for they are those who cross over.”
52. “Of all that is written, I love only what a person has written with their own blood. Write with blood, and you will discover that blood is spirit.”
53. “When you stare for long into an abyss, the abyss also stares into you.”
54. “He who fights with monsters should look to it that he himself does not become a monster.”
55. “There are no moral phenomena at all, but only a moral interpretation of phenomena.”
56. “The advantage of a bad memory is that one enjoys the same good things for the first time several times.”
57. “That which does not kill us makes us stronger.”
58. “The snake that cannot shed its skin perishes. Likewise, spirits who are prevented from changing their opinions cease to be spirit.”
59. “A thought, even when it is possible, even when it is morally certain, can still be a prejudice.”
60. “What? A great man? I always see only the actor of his own ideal.”
61. “Is man just a mistake of God? Or God just a mistake of man?”
62. “Out of damp and crooked beings, as out of damp and crooked wood, man is made—and humanity needs to be crooked wood.”
63. “The most common lie is that which one lies to himself; lying to others is relatively the exception.”
64. “He who cannot obey himself will be commanded.”
65. “The higher we soar, the smaller we appear to those who cannot fly.”
66. “Women are considered deep—why? Because one can never discover their depths. Women are not even shallow.”
67. “You go to women? Do not forget the whip!”
68. “Marriage: so I call the will of two to create the one that is more than those who created it.”
69. “He who has a why to live for can bear almost any how.”
70. “Have you ever said Yes to a single joy? O my friends, then you have said Yes to all woe as well. All things are entangled, ensnared, enamored; if ever you wanted one moment twice, if ever you said, ‘You please me, happiness, instant, moment!’ then you wanted everything back!”
71. “How could I fail to be grateful to my whole life? And so I tell my life to myself.”
72. “I assess the power of a will by how much resistance, pain, torture it endures and knows how to turn to its advantage.”
73. “At bottom, every human knows very well that they are in the world just once, as something unique, and that no accident, however strangely, will ever jumble a second time into unity such a motley multitude: they know it, but hides it like a bad conscience—why? From fear of the neighbor, who demands convention and conceals himself with it.”
74. “One must learn to love. This is what happens to us in music: first one has to learn to hear a figure or melody at all, to detect and distinguish it, to isolate it and delimit it as a separate life. Then it requires some exertion and good will to tolerate it in spite of its strangeness, to be patient with its appearance and expression, and kindhearted about its oddity. Finally there comes a moment when we are used to it, when we wait for it, when we sense that we should miss it if it were missing; and now it continues to compel and enchant us relentlessly until we have become its humble and enraptured lovers who desire nothing better from the world than it and only it.”
75. “We have art so that we may not perish from the truth.”
76. “Morality is the herd instinct in the individual.”
77. “I distrust all systematizers and I avoid them. The will to a system is a lack of integrity.”
78. “The Christian resolution to find the world ugly and bad has made the world ugly and bad.”
79. “Faith means not wanting to know what is true.”
80. “What is done out of love always occurs beyond good and evil.”
81. “There is no such thing as moral phenomena, but only a moral interpretation of phenomena.”
82. “Whoever fights monsters should see to it that in the process he does not become a monster.”
83. “The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies but also to hate his friends.”
84. “Madness is the exception in individuals but the rule in groups.”
85. “In individuals, insanity is rare; but in groups, parties, nations, and epochs, it is the rule.”
86. “To live is to suffer, to survive is to find some meaning in the suffering.”
87. “Blessed are the forgetful, for they get the better even of their blunders.”
88. “Ah, women. They make the highs higher and the lows more frequent.”
89. “The future influences the present just as much as the past.”
90. “There is a time with all great talents—it is the age of contempt. For precisely the freedom of the flying bird that soars higher and higher into the heights becomes more and more unbearable to the eagle that has grown weak.”
91. “Not necessity, not desire—no, the love of power is the demon of men. Let them have everything—health, food, a place to live, entertainment—they are and remain unhappy, low-spirited. For the demon waits and waits and will be satisfied.”
92. “Man’s suffering is the deepest reason for the fact that all profound spirits have had to be pessimistic.”
93. “When one has not had a good father, one must create one.”
94. “In heaven, all the interesting people are missing.”
95. “I am not a man, I am dynamite.”
96. “The discipline of suffering, of great suffering—do you not know that only this discipline has created all enhancements of man so far?”
97. “My formula for greatness in a human being is amor fati: that one wants nothing to be different, not forward, not backward, not in all eternity. Not merely bear what is necessary, still less conceal it… but love it."