1. “Do not spoil what you have by desiring what you have not; remember that what you now have was once among the things you only hoped for.”
2. “Is God willing to prevent evil, but not able? Then he is not omnipotent. Is he able, but not willing? Then he is malevolent. Is he both able and willing? Then whence cometh evil? Is he neither able nor willing? Then why call him God?”
3. “Death, therefore, the most awful of evils, is nothing to us, seeing that, when we are, death is not come, and, when death is come, we are not.”
4. “He who is not satisfied with a little is satisfied with nothing.”
5. “Why should I fear death? If I am, then death is not. If Death is, then I am not. Why should I fear that which can only exist when I do not?”
6. “Of all the means to insure happiness throughout the whole life, by far the most important is the acquisition of friends.”
7. “You don't develop courage by being happy in your relationships everyday. You develop it by surviving difficult times and challenging adversity.”
8. “The wealth required by nature is limited and is easy to procure; but the wealth required by vain ideals extends to infinity.”
9. “It is folly for a man to pray to the gods for that which he has the power to obtain by himself.”
10. “Not what we have, but what we enjoy, constitutes our abundance.”
11. “I have never wished to cater to the crowd; for what I know they do not approve, and what they approve I do not know.”
12. “It is not so much our friends' help that helps us as the confident knowledge that they will help us.”
13. “The art of living well and the art of dying well are one.”
14. “If the gods listened to the prayers of men, all humankind would quickly perish since they constantly pray for many evils to befall one another.”
15. “He who has peace of mind disturbs neither himself nor another.”
16. “I was not, I was, I am not, I care not. (Non fui, fui, non sum, non curo)”
17. “Never say that I have taken it, only that I have given it back.”
18. “I am writing this not to many, but to you: certainly we are a great enough audience for each other.”
19. “Death is nothing to us. When we exist, death is not; and when death exists, we are not. All sensation and consciousness ends with death and therefore in death there is neither pleasure nor pain. The fear of death arises from the belief that in death, there is awareness.”
20. “Don't fear the gods, Don't worry about death; What is good is easy to get, and What is terrible is easy to endure.”
21. “Accustom yourself to the belief that death is of no concern to us, since all good and evil lie in sensation and sensation ends with death. Therefore the true belief that death is nothing to us makes a mortal life happy, not by adding to it an infinite time, but by taking away the desire for immortality.”
22. “Empty is the argument of the philosopher which does not relieve any human suffering.”
23. “Nothing is sufficient for the person who finds sufficiency too little.”
24. “The noble man is chiefly concerned with wisdom and friendship; of these, the former is a mortal good, the latter an immortal one.”
25. “The fool’s life is empty of gratitude and full of fears; its course lies wholly toward the future.”
26. “We must, therefore, pursue the things that make for happiness, seeing that when happiness is present, we have everything; but when it is absent, we do everything to possess it.”
27. “It is better for you to be free of fear lying upon a pallet, than to have a golden couch and a rich table and be full of trouble.”
28. “He who says either that the time for philosophy has not yet come or that it has passed is like someone who says that the time for happiness has not yet come or that it has passed.”
29. “It is impossible to live a pleasant life without living wisely and well and justly, and it is impossible to live wisely and well and justly without living pleasantly.”
30. “We should look for someone to eat and drink with before looking for something to eat and drink, for dining alone is leading the life of a lion or wolf.”
31. “The greater the difficulty, the more glory in surmounting it. Skillful pilots gain their reputation from storms and tempests.”
32. “Every desire which we do not satisfy is nevertheless not bad in itself; but it is bad when the price we set on it is excessive, or when it is not attainable, or when, from a just consideration of the injuries it would draw down upon us, it would be more hurtful than the possession of the object of it is useful.”
33. “We do not so much need the help of our friends as the confidence of their help when in need.”
34. “The time when you should most of all withdraw into yourself is when you are compelled to be in a crowd.”
35. “Vain is the word of that philosopher which does not heal any suffering of man.”
36. “If you do not on all occasions refer each of your actions to the ultimate end of nature, but instead in acting, turn aside to avoid or pursue something else, your actions will not correspond with your professions.”
37. “Luxury has a way of making us forget what we truly need, and confusing want with need.”
38. “To eat and drink without a friend is to devour like the lion and the wolf.”
39. “There is no such thing as justice in the abstract; it is merely a compact between men.”
40. “The just man is most free from disturbance, while the unjust is full of the utmost disturbance.”
41. “Not what we have, but what we enjoy, constitutes our abundance.”
42. “The misfortune of the wise is better than the prosperity of the fool.”
43. “Let no one be slow to seek wisdom when he is young nor weary in the search of it when he has grown old. For no age is too early or too late for the health of the soul.”
44. “We must try to make the end of our journey better than the beginning.”
45. “The man who follows nature and not vain opinions is self-sufficient in all things.”
46. “We must not pretend to study philosophy, but study it in reality: for it is not the appearance of health that we need, but real health.”
47. “Free cannot be he who is a slave to circumstance.”
48. “Pain is considered an evil; but it is not an evil persistently, for its intensity varies and its duration is not perpetual.”
49. “The pleasure of the stomach is the beginning and root of all good.”
50. “We must laugh and philosophize at the same time and do our household duties and employ our other faculties, and never cease proclaiming the sayings of the true philosophy